= Improve RTF Import (RTF Tokenizer)
Miklos Vajna <vmiklos@frugalware.org>

== Abstract

For the ooxml Word import filter, a new filter framework is developed
that has better import quality as the old separate filters, and also
shares quite some code. Having the RTF import use that framework would
be hugely useful; both binary doc and rtf are very similar in structure,
and could have tokenizers plugged into the filter framework (and thus
being handled by the same high-level filter code). The doc tokenizer is
already worked on, so a RTF tokenizer would be a an awesome feature -
and this summer I would like to work on this.
  
== Content

=== Detailed Description

==== Full description

LibreOffice Writer's import functionality basically has two forms. The
old style ones are $$C++$$ filters are subcalled from the Reader class
(for example: RtfReader for RTF, AsciiReader for ASCII, HTMLReader
for HTML). The new style ones are implemented as an UNO component (for
example: the writerfilter/source/ooxml directory for DOCX). There are
currently two general problems with the RTF import filter:

* It is an MS Word format, but it does not use any shared code from
  the filter framework.
* It has several shortcomings, almost none of the new export features
  listed in sw/source/filter/ww8/README-rtf.txt are handled.

Porting RtfReader to use the new filter framework has been started (see
writerfilter/source/rtftok/), but is not yet done. This summer I would
like to finish it.

Additionally - as time permits, after porting is done - I want to pick
up features from RTF specification which are not yet supported by
LibreOffice's RTF import filter and add support for them.

==== Benefits

When the project is completed, users who use the RTF import filter can
have a better one: from a technical view it will use a more modern API,
from a practical view, it'll be improved in general.

==== Motivation

I got the idea of working on this because when I did the RTF export
filter, I had to use Microsoft Office to test the result. Also, whenever
a user saves a document in RTF, then opens it, all the benefits of the
new exporter goes away, as the importer does not understand those new
features. This gave me a feeling that improving RTF support would be a
good idea in general.

==== Implementation design

Regarding implementation, I want to take the DOCX import filter as an
example (without over-complicating it!) and implement the new RTF filter
in a similar way - but of course heavily based on the current RtfReader
implementation where it makes sense.

I don't know exact details, because I haven't (yet) read the started RTF
tokenizer nor the relevant part (writerfilter) of the LibreOffice API,
but I expect to read and understand the code from the
sw/source/filter/rtf directory and I want to place the new RTF code
under writerfilter/source/rtftok, where the DOCX one already is.

I'm aware that it would be possible to use XSL transformations to create
a new RTF filter as well, but not ignoring performance aspects and my
(quite weak) XSLT knowledge, I decided to create a $$C++$$ filter.

==== References

* http://www.microsoft.com/downloads/details.aspx?FamilyId=DD422B8D-FF06-4207-B476-6B5396A18A2B&displaylang=en[RTF
  official specification]
* http://blogs.sun.com/GullFOSS/entry/the_new_microsoft_word_filter[Blog
  post about the new work import filter framework]

=== Implementation timeline

==== Milestones

* Update the development environment to latest master on
  which I will base my work, decide where do I publish my code, work out
  other infrastructure details. (Till 2011.05.30.)

* Understand how the already existing DOCX filter work: the tokenizer
  and the domain mapper. (Till 2011.06.06.)

* Understand how the current RTF import filter works.
  (Till 2011.06.13.)

* Decide how do I test my code, possibly write testcases and/or work out
  a mechanism to compare the new filter to the old one. The more
  automated way, the better. Partly to ensure I do not break anything, and
  partly to provide an objective method to measure
  my progress. Find out what features are missing from the domain mapper
  to be able to port the RTF filter without introducing regressions. (Till
  2011.06.20.)

* Do the actual porting: completing the tokenizer and extending the
  domain mapper to provide the features needed for the new RTF import.
  At first round I want to reuse code from RtfReader where possible and
  reach a point where the new filter is as much good as the old one was.
  (Till 2011.07.04.)

* Review what was reached, if there are differences which are decided to
  be good ones, document them. Decide what to work on next, etc.
  (Till 2011.07.11.)

* Fix bugs, fine-tune, update the code based on suggestions from other
  LibreOffice developers, implement features from the specification if
  time permits. (Till 2011.08.08.)

So I would like the first version of the new RTF filter ready by the
time of mid-term evaluation, then I can work out the minor problems,
write documentation and if time permits - implement new features from
the specification in the second half of the summer. I used concrete
dates so that I can be checked easily if I'm on track, but of course I
may finish with a given part a bit earlier or I may have a little delay.

==== Exams, holidays, etc.

I'm a student in Hungary, and here the exam period is between 2011.05.23
and 2011.06.20.  Sadly this has a big overlap with the Summer of Code,
which starts on 2011.05.23. I'm aware of this and last year I managed to
get over this as well. I plan to work on my project 40 hours a week,
which permits to spend entire days on my project, then work nothing a
few days before the exam.  I don't know the exact date, but probably
after the mid-term evaluation I'll have a week of holiday.  I think once
I returned I can work more productive on my project with a fresh mind,
compared to going nowhere during the whole summer.

==== Communication

My experience is that IRC is handy for quick questions, but sometimes
email is better to communicate in an asynchronous way. I also like
writing each day about what did I do in a blog-like form.  If this is OK
for my mentor, then I would like to use these for this project as well.

==== Invested time before, during and after SoC

I'm doing trivial git-related (or other areas where I'm familiar with
the codebase) small fixes before the SoC starts, just to get used to the
new build system, etc.  I plan to work 40 hours a week during the SoC.
(Well, basically. I do not use a timer, the average is about something
like this.) I don't know the future, I hope I can do some contribution
after SoC as well.

==== Future work

I don't know anything about it so far, but I'm sure there will be new
ideas during the implementation of the project. I'm sure I'll at least
document these ideas once the project is finished, so I or others can
work on them after the end of SoC.

=== Relevant knowledge

==== Experience of LibreOffice

As every average Linux user - I'm using LibreOffice on a daily basis, to
read/write/convert any non-ascii document (well, except PDF). I use
Writer / Calc / Impress whenever the document is not long/technical
enough that using Latex worths considering.

==== Experience in the project specific area

I expect that I'll need to write $$C++$$ code during the project. I
contributed to various projects written in that language, most notably I
added
http://cedric.bosdonnat.free.fr/wordpress/?p=697[a new RTF exporter] to
Go-oo last summer, which was implemented in about 8000 lines of $$C++$$
code.

==== Used toolchains and platforms

I'm a Linux guy, I used OS X for a long time (but not currently), mainly
for testing purposes as well. I do not really use Windows, but I have
one installed in a virtual machine (can be useful when I want to see
what MSO exports in RTF to feed it to the RTF importer :-) ).  I'm
familiar with `gcc` and `make`, I used autotools for other projects
previously as well. I'm familiar with `git` as well, but I'm quite new
to LibreOffice's new build system (though right now writerfilter uses
dmake, it seems).

==== Recent interaction with the LibreOffice community

I'm hanging around on #libreoffice-dev, and I'm subscribed to the
developer mailing list.

=== About Me

==== Where do I work/study and my interests

Education: Completing an M.Sc. degree in Computer Science (to be
finished this year, December - final exams in January) at Budapest
University of Technology and Economics. I work for SZTAKI
(http://www.sztaki.hu/?en, part time - 1 day in a week, since 2004). I
have a page with a few minor projects:
http://vmiklos.hu/projects/

==== Links

A have a page with links to patches I contributed to other FOSS
projects:  http://vmiklos.hu/portfolio/  Mostly minor code and/or
documentation fixes. I contributed a few more complex patches to the
pacman package manager, the bitlbee IM gateway, Git, SWIG and
OpenOffice.org (these are C and $$C++$$ projects).  I'm generally a
bash, C/$$C++$$ and Python guy. I know some perl/Java/XSL as well.

==== IRC name

vmiklos

=== Link to Further Information

http://wiki.documentfoundation.org/Development/Gsoc/Ideas#Improve_RTF_Import_.28RTF_Tokenizer.29

== My easy programming task

- https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=32413#c0[Goal]
- http://cgit.freedesktop.org/libreoffice/writer/commit/?id=c62b8fc02d9357cea7fd399b173ed5280bf4c53c[My
  solution] for the Writer part of the problem.
